.TH packxxk 1 "July 2009" "RabbitSign 2.0"
.SH NAME
packxxk \- pack TI graphing calculator software files

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBpackxxk\fR [ \fB-t\fR \fItype\fR ] [ \fB-d\fR \fIdate\fR ]
[ \fB-o\fR \fIxxkfile\fR ] \fIappfile\fR ...

.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBpackxxk\fR is a program to generate Flash Application and OS files
for the Texas Instruments TI-73, TI-83 Plus, TI-84 Plus, TI-89, and
TI-92 Plus graphing calculators.  The files generated are in the
``TIFL'' format used by recent versions of TI's GraphLink and
TI-Connect software.

The input file to \fBpackxxk\fR must be in TI-Hex or TIFL format to
begin with, and (in order for the application to be installed) it must
have been digitally signed before being packed.  \fBpackxxk\fR does
not do this, nor does it check for the presence of a signature.  You
can use \fBrabbitsign\fR(1) to sign applications in several common
formats.

If multiple input files are specified, \fBpackxxk\fR creates a
multi-part TIFL file.

.SS OPTIONS
.TP
\fB-t\fR \fItype\fR
Specify the type of program (e.g., `8xk' for a TI-83 Plus application,
or `73u' for a TI-73 operating system.)  The default behavior is to
infer the program type from the name of the input file.  (If the input
file does not have a recognized suffix, the type is guessed based on
the contents of the program header.)

.TP
\fB-c\fR \fIid\fR
Manually specify the calculator device ID (e.g., 0x73 for the TI-83
Plus, or 0x74 for the TI-73.)

.TP
\fB-d\fR [ \fImonth\fR/\fIday\fR/\fIyear\fR | \fIday\fR-\fImonth\fR-\fIyear\fR ]
Manually specify the date stamp for the application.  The default is
to use the current date in the local time zone.

.TP
\fB-o\fR \fIxxkfile\fR
Specify the output file name (default is to write to standard output.)

.SH SEE ALSO
\fBrabbitsign\fR(1)

.SH AUTHOR
Benjamin Moody <floppusmaximus@users.sf.net>
